---
layout: post
title: "Do you need a PhD?"
published: false
category: posts
---

In my [previous post](/post/phd/2013/07/04/what-is-a-phd.html), I
described what I think a PhD really means. In this post, I would like to
explore whether getting a PhD is really necessary for your career
choices or future plans. 

A PhD is a lengthy investment. Data gathered as recently as 2011
estimates that it takes about [7.7
years](http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/sed/2011/pdf/tab31.pdf) since the
start of graduate school to complete the PhD. Unless mentioned
otherwise, the figures that I report in this article are taken from the
[Survey of Earned
Doctorates](http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/srvydoctorates/). As far as I
know, all PhD students who graduated from US universities are asked to
take the survey. At the University of Illinois, where I did my PhD, it
was a requirement for graduating. There is a nice interactive version of
the survey that is worth exploring
[here](http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/sed/digest/2011/).

So, what careers require a PhD?

Let's start with the most obvious: academia. A PhD is an absolute
necessity if you ever want to be a professor at a university. You can be
a lecturer at a university with a MS but not a professor. So if you are
considering a professorship somewhere, a PhD is a must.

Where else might you need a PhD? This question is more difficult for me
to answer for the general case. Since I did my PhD in Computer Science
which is a Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
field, I can only speak broadly for that. I do not have enough friends
completing graduate degrees in non-STEM fields, e.g., humanities, to
comment on whether a PhD is a necessity for their popular career
choices.

Drilling down a bit more into Computer Science, it seems that for the
more practical fields such as 
