---
layout: post
title: "Things to watch out for when selling your car on Craigslist"
category: posts
---

This is a true account of a newbie's (that's me!) experience selling his
car on Craigslist. The transaction happened a few days ago and I had
some time to reflect on it more. The purpose of this post is to document
some of the things that, in hindsight, seem suspicious _and_ to let
others know what to watch out for while selling their vehicle. Note that
most of these things are quite speculative â€“ there is no way for me to
prove whether these are true or not. I am just documenting why I think they
were (very) suspicious. If you are ever thinking of selling/buying a
car, you might want to read through this to form your opinion.

<p class="text-info"> By the way, one thing you should know about me is
that I am a rather cynical and skeptical person. Unless I can verify it,
I usually don't believe anything that people tell me. Blame this on
getting duped by religion for a good decade of my life. So I
<em>might</em> be viewing everything too suspiciously. OK, enough about
that, let's get on with the story.</p>

My roommate, posted a Craigslist's ad for our 2001 Volkswagen Passat at
1 am on Thursday. Our car didn't pass the smog and emissions checks and
we were reluctant to take it to California with us. We were second
owners of the car and the car is in pretty good condition. We were aware
of a few minor defects (like the seat not reclining completely, etc). We
weren't asking for a high price. We were asking for $4600 which was
decent given the known defects. We paid $9995 for the car when we bought
it about 7 years ago. It's a GLX so it has all the nice extras such as a
V6 engine, leather seats, heated front seats, styling, etc. It has
150,000 miles on it so it's not a new car but it has been
well-maintained.

We were leaving campus soon and we wanted to sell off our car quickly.
We were prepared to lower the price quite a bit. The money we get back
will help subsidize the down payment for a new car.

Though we posted the ad at 1 am, by next morning, we had around 5
requests to see the car. One person even offered $3750 in cash. There
were a few others who tried to bargain it down immediately.  One person
was even more prompt: he requested to see the car at 10.15. 

<p class="text-info">
Let's call this person F. F is the main character of the story since he
ultimately ending up purchasing the car.
</p>

F came by and looked at the car. He told a story about how he was
purchasing this car for his daughter who was going to study at Georgia
State in the fall. He was looking for something that would be good for
her. Because of the broken seat that couldn't recline, he was not able
to test drive it first. So he wanted to ask his sister to come by later
to test drive it. His daughter was not around to test drive it now. 

<p class="text-info"> One of the easiest way to form rapport is to tell
a story about a family member in a similar situation. In this case, he
used the story of his daughter who was going to college. As college
students ourselves, we can definitely associate with that and would be
more sympathetic to his requests. Whether his story was true or not
doesn't really matter. He was trying to form <i>rapport</i>.</p>

<p class="text-info">Dale Carnegie wrote the book <i>How to Win Friends
and Influence People</i> with very good advice on how to form rapport.
It's been some time since I read it but I believe that this was one of
the techniques. Carnegie, obviously, wasn't advocating for his
techniques to be used in such devious ways....</p>

F also asked if the price could be lowered because of the seat. We were
aware of the seat and had anticipated lowering the price based on that.
That was not a problem. We got a quote from the dealer on how to fix the
seat and it was going to cost $241 for parts. Labor will probably cost
another $100. At this point, he wanted to lower the cost to $3800, which
we agreed to. Again, this might seem like a lost, but we felt it was all
right -- more on this later.

He said he can get $3800 in cash for the same day. And that we should do
a buyer's check at his mechanic. This was a reasonable request because
when selling your car, you should always do a buyer's check at the
buyer's mechanic of choice. It seems only fair.

So we met up at 6 pm to go to his mechanic. He was in his own car with
three young children. I talked to him a bit and he said that they were
all in elementary school. 

<p class="text-info"> 
It felt a bit weird to me that he will bring his kids with him to
buy/sell a car. This is my most speculative suspicion in this post, but
I think he might have done that again just to build some rapport. By
showing that he is a family person with many kids to support, it makes
us more likely to reduce the price. Again, this is pure speculation but
I am not even sure if the kids are his. Maybe one of them was his and
the rest were either his nieces or just some school friends.
</p>

His mechanic -- call him J --  seemed quite knowledgeable. He pointed
out a few problems with the axle that we were aware of from talking to
our own mechanic. They were not immediate issues but they were things
that had to be taken care off if you were going to drive the car in the
long run. All in all, the cost of repairs could be a few hundred dollars
-- maintaining a Volkswagen isn't cheap since all the parts have to come
from overseas. Repairing the timing belt alone could be $1000 according
to our own mechanic.

The only issue with J the mechanic? He was operating from a **very**
suspicious location. Basically, it was from a storage unit! If you have
ever watched an episode of _Breaking Bad_, this almost felt like some
shaddy location where they would do one of their exchanges. Fortunately,
I had someone else come along with us in a different car. And I had told
all my friends where I was going. So here's another lesson for you:
always bring someone else with you especially if you are going to sell
the car and need a ride back. Don't take the ride back from the buyer
since you would be at his mercy.

After J pointed out the issues, F bargained to lower the price down to
around $3100. Again, I didn't mind since we wanted to sell this off and
the issues the mechanic raised seemed fair (and matches with what our
mechanic told us). This is also, where his story of buying the car for
his daughter becomes useful. If it were true, we certainly would want
this daughter to drive a car that had been properly fixed (timing belt
changed, car axles taken care of, etc).

At this point, he mentioned that he only had $3000 in cash and asked if
it would be all right to have the remaining $100 in check. We said fine.
Why did we agree? At this point, we (my roomate and I) agreed $3000 was
a good price. Whether we got the remaining check or not (maybe it will
bounce) was not a problem to us. 

The astute reader might catch on the fact that he said that he was going
to buy the car for $3800 cash. And now he only mentioned that he had
$3000? Where did the remaining $800 go? Clearly he wasn't prepared to
pay the $800. This was very suspicious. If we were not prepared to go
down to $3000, we would have canceled the deal immediately.

So we drove to his house to pick up the money. It was raining that day
and I believe that he took the most circuitous route to arrive at his
place. It was much longer and further than it needed to be. And he used
all the backroads. I am speculating that this was a ploy to tire us out
mentally. It was already late in the day, raining and we simply didn't
want to have to deal with these hassles again if the deal didn't go
through.

At this house, he took his time trying to get the cash. He was fumbling
around and finally said that he couldn't find his wife's check book to
write us the $100. Again, at this point, as sellers this was a red flag
and you should cancel the transaction immediately instead of giving him
the benefit of doubt. He said that he will bring the check to us
tomorrow at our place. We managed to get the $3000 though, in cash,
which was important. So we sign off on the title and handed him the car.

<p class="text-info"> 
As mentioned earlier, we weren't counting on getting the $100. There was
the real possibility of his check bouncing. Or him no showing up the
next day.
</p>

<p class="text-info"> 
Anyway, as any good researcher would do, I took this as an opportunity
to conduct an experiment. If he had actually showed up with the check
the next day, my faith in humanity would be restored. If he didn't show
up, then it just proves that you can never trust people when it comes to
money.
</p>

<p class="text-info"> F, however, did something really unexpected the
next day....  </p>

I was about to contact him the next day for the remaining $100 when he
called me first. He told me that after talking it over to his wife he
decided that he didn't think the car was a good match for his daughter's
needs. They would prefer something that she could drive immediately
without having to make the repairs. Then he was "nice" enough to say
that he return the car and give us a "few hundred back" for our time.

I told him that the sale was final and he had seen the car and its
condition. Since he talked to his mechanic, he should also be aware of
the cost and time of repairs. I also said that we had signed off on the
title. 

F then replied that he "talked" to people at the DMV and that usually
buyers and sellers have a "48-hour period" to back off. He also
mentioned that it was possible to just restore the original title at the
DMV.

I said no. He seemed fine with the decision. But it was not clear if he
would pursue the "48-hour period" issue.

I was really concerned about the "48-hour period" issue he raised. If
this were my own home country, it would be easy to call this _bollocks_.
There is no such rule from where I am from. However, this is the United
States. If you buy something there is always an accompanying return
policy, usually a very permissive one. I wasn't sure if this applied to
cars sold privately.

So, now I have something else on my plate. I needed to go seek legal
services to see if what he said has merit. Perhaps he would pursue legal
matters to settle this. And I just didn't have the time to deal with
this unexpectedness.

We talked to a couple of my American friends. Most of them said what F
said was plain nonsense. However, none of them are legal experts so I
still couldn't be sure. I now have an appointment with student legal
services next week to get to the bottom of this.

Of course, after all this, the issue of the remaining $100 was never
raised again. So F got what he wanted -- a good car for $3000. This was
probably his ploy from the beginning.

All in all, I don't mind selling the car at a cheaper price to F.
Getting $3000 was good enough for us because it can be used as a down
payment for a new car. I just wished he didn't pull the shit with trying
to return it. He might be a professional buyer who prowls Craigslist for
cheap luxury cars from university students and then tries to sell them
for higher later. Nothing wrong with that. It's a workable business
model. But he just didn't need shit to pull that off. The fact that he
knew what to say, how to handle the business transaction, etc seems to
strongly suggest that he has done this before.

To summarize here are the list of suspicious things that you should
definitely watch out for while selling your car:

1. Watch out for people telling a story about buying a car for his/her
   close family member. It's a _probably_ way to form a connection with
you as the seller.
1. Know the condition of the car before selling it. Do your own check at
   a mechanic you can trust. That way you can see if both assessments
match.
1. Be firm on the price that you are willing to accept and don't go
   below this. Ours was $3000.
1. Make sure you have access to student legal services. At this point, I
   am not sure if F is going to pull more shit with returning the car.
So I am talking to legal services to get all my bases covered.

Again, like I mentioned at the beginning of this post, I have no way to
prove any of what I have written. It's all speculative. However, given
the number of red flags, I think it is safe to say that F definitely had
something up his sleeve from the beginning.

I will update this post most when I hear back from student legal
services. But at this point, I think F was just trying to pull a fast
one with the "48-hour period" issue.

