---
layout: post
title: "What is a PhD?"
categories: [post, phd]
---

This is the first in a series of articles that I have always wanted to
write. I just needed to wait for the right time to write it. I think the
time is right -- I just completed (defended and deposited) my PhD a few
weeks back, so I feel that I am now in a _better_ position to opine
about this topic. These are all thoughts that I have always held dear
but never wrote down.

What, specifically, is the topic of this post? It is about the things
that no one tells you about what a PhD is. This is just a natural side
effect from fact that unless you grow up in a campus town, not many
people you know will have a PhD.

A PhD is _just another degree_, much like your Bachelor's and Master's
degrees. A Bachelor's degree is the most structured of them, much like a
high school diploma. To earn a Bachelor's you take the required courses
and get decent grades in them. A Master's is less structured.  You need
to take some courses and perhaps work on a large project. A PhD is the
least structured (it is, thankfully, becoming more structured now). You
take more classes and then you need to come up with a specific area to
work on. Then you need to demonstrate to a group of _at least_ four
other professors that your topic has valuable _intellectual merit_.

Many people have a romanticized view of a PhD. Initially, I shared this
view too. We think that PhDs are the world's smartest people who can
solve any problem given to them. This is not really true. Instead of
using the term smartest, it is more appropriate and accurate to describe
PhDs as _reasonably smart people who have persevered to become experts
in specialized fields under an academic environment_. The keywords are
"experts", "specialized" and "academic".

In this post, I will clarify why I have chosen those words. And,
finally, I will explain why I chose the phrase "reasonably smart".

**Expert**. This implies that you are now one of the leading authorities
on the topic of your PhD. It means that you have worked long and hard on
a subject and understand most of the subtleties behind it. The
subtleties are things that they don't teach you in a textbook because
they are too messy to model and explain to a beginner. The subtleties
are the things that most people sweep under the rug because it is simply
too hard to explain it until you have worked on the topic for a
sufficiently long time.

In fact, if you give them enough time, PhDs can talk about all the
subtleties of their particular topic -- way more than any normal person
would care to listen to.

**Specialized**. This keyword is very important and needs to be combined
with the previous word, i.e., expert. For instance, when you complete a
PhD in Computer Science, it does not mean that you are an expert in
Computer Science. In fact, even if your topic is in, for instance,
Parallel Programming, it does not necessarily mean that you are an
expert in it. You need to drill down more. For instance, while my topic
was in parallel programming, it focused deeply on semi-automated
analyses and transformations for a particular style of parallel
programming. That is the specialized field that I am an expert on.

**Academic**. This is another very important keyword. Remember what I
wrote about earlier about demonstrating intellectual merit to a group of
four professors? Well, turns out that there is a _preferred_ way of
demonstrating intellectual merit in an academic setting. 

First, let's see how things work in the real world. If you were in
charge of a large project in the real world, you demonstrate competency
to your employers by building a complete, reliable and working system
that others can use. You are rewarded for making something practical
that works.

This is not how it actually works in an academic setting. You
demonstrate competency by building a partial and mostly-working
prototype that is sufficient for proving what you claim it does. It does
not need to be working perfectly. In an academic setting, there is a
threshold, above which, doing extra doesn't get you any other
appreciable recognition from your peers. Thus, improving your prototype
into a complete working system is usually not seen as a profitable way
to spend your time. Your time is better spent working on building the
next prototype to demonstrate your future claims.

The unfortunate consequence of this is that sometimes that prototype
that you build could be rather detached from the real world. In extreme
cases, since you are the only one working on it, it might not even work
for other people. Building something that is practical is a good thing
to do but it is not pivotal to getting a PhD. I've read enough papers
where the proposed technique was so complicated that most people would
shy away from using it in real life.

So those are the three main keywords. Now let's talk about the phrase
"reasonably smart". Getting a PhD is more about perseverance than
intellect. You do not need to be the smartest person, you need to be the
one who is willing to persevere the most. This means investing time on
your topic: reading published papers, building prototypes, discussing
your ideas, publishing your own papers, etc. Some of these activities
can get very tedious and repetitive over time. So the ones who
eventually end up completing a PhD are the ones who are steadfast in
what they are doing.

Hopefully this post has helped clarified what a PhD actually is. Like I
mentioned, unless you frequently interact with PhDs, it is not
immediately obvious what it means to have a PhD. Most technical
interviewers have the wrong idea of what a PhD is and, thus, tend to
have wrong expectations during the interview process.

