---
layout: post
title: "Made to Stick"
category: posts
---

<div class="media pull-left">
<a href="http://www.heathbrothers.com/madetostick/">
<img
src="http://bks2.books.google.com/books?id=DhRlRwAACAAJ&printsec=frontcover&img=1&zoom=1&imgtk=AFLRE70qTJ9S86TDlIDEbBLMaBZd3OgQhfltmmaebaTHSzko55q3rUDYOMJzunwwnejEyAd8WazoCRdCIut1vQOeN_jRAVv3flgW0TW6nhkiJbS0qj-NwsO0f9VhRQCH17C3iCcAGikH"
class="media-object"/></a>

</div>

_Made to Stick_ is one of the most influential books that I have ever
read. Period. It's a book so important that I cannot stop recommending
it to everyone who is about to give any kind of talk, pitch or
presentation.

The message is simple: there are six key steps to making a
successful presentation that _sticks_. A successful presentation isn't
necessarily the one that is most beautify; it's not necessarily the one
with the most data. It's the one that everyone will remember after
talking to you.

The best way to illustrate this -- following the advice from the book
itself -- is to give a concrete example. This concrete example is taken
from the first chapter of the book, which you can conveniently read at
the authors'
[website](http://www.heathbrothers.com/madetostick/chapterone.php). It's
a story about something mundane that we usually don't think twice about
consuming: movie popcorn.

In 1992, the Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPI) found out
something interesting: a typical serving of popcorn from a movie theater
could contain up to 37 grams of saturated fat.

Now unless you are a nutritionist, hearing the term 37 grams of fat is
unlikely to cause any form of panic. However, it turns out that the
recommended daily intake of saturated fat for a typical adult is 20
grams -- a single serving of that movie popcorn had nearly double the
recommended daily amount!

This is serious news. And being the CSPI, one of their main interests
was to raise public awareness about this phenomenon. Imagine that you
were working for the CSPI, how would you launch a public campaign to
spread the news?

I confess that before reading this book, what I would have done would be
to create a pretty bar chart with two bars: one that shows the amount of
recommended daily fat and another that shows the amount of fat in a
serving of popcorn. My main idea being that it _should_ be obvious that
popcorn has almost double the amount of recommended fat from just
_looking_ at the chart. _It should be clear, shouldn't it?_

Turns out there is a much better way to do this. Instead of a fancy
graph, the better approach would be to phrase it like this:

> A medium-sized 'butter' popcorn at a typical neighborhood movie theater
> contains more artery-clogging fat than a bacon-and-eggs breakfast, a Big
> Mac and fries for lunch, and a steak dinner with all the trimmings â€”
> combined!

Why is that sentence so much more effective than the graph idea that I
had? Well, it's _short_, _unexpected_, _concrete_, and it forms an
_emotional story_. People are able to identify with it immediately. And
that's what an important presentation must accomplish -- make people
identify with what it is that you are doing.

Here's a quick chart that summarizes the six key steps from the book:

<img
src="http://everything-pr.com/wp-content/uploads/2009/07/succes.jpg"/>

So what has this got to do with programming? Not much actually. But it
has a lot to do with how you sell yourself, your skills and your
products to other people. Just because you have the world's greatest
code doesn't mean anything unless you can get people to pay attention to
you. And now there is a readable non-nonsense book that describes the
process for doing so.

I've used the techniques in the book myself during my presentations and
during my interviews. I have recommended the book to my colleagues who
are about to make presentations. And when people embrace those ideas,
there is definitely a positive effect on their presentations <i
class="icon-thumbs-up"></i>.

By the way, the story happened in 1992. I was unable to find any
continuation of the story in the present time. So I would assume that
movie popcorn has probably less saturated now compared to back then.
